COM3505 week 08 course notes
===

# The Lecture

This week's lecture slides are here: https://goo.gl/dowHPH


# NOTE...

We'll be using **LiPo** batteries from next week -- please **review the safety
instructions** below and be sure to follow them. If in doubt ask a member of
staff.


# Learning Objectives

Our objectives this week are to:

- look in detail at the process of developing a new IoT device
- start programming on the unPhone
- start thinking about project choices
- learn about cloud-side IoT systems


# Assignments and Assessment

Your github repository will now contain:

- `TouchPaintThing`, a sketch which illustrates the use of the unPhone's touch
  screen and LCD display (and the power management chip). Have a play with it!
- `MyEtchAThing`, a template for a simple Etch-A-Sketch like game on the
  unPhone. See the **TODO** comment, and add code to make the sketch work.
- Review the lecture slides on project options, and think about which project
  you want to do in your team.

## Coding Hints

We're using Adafruit's graphics library to draw on the LCD screen, see:
https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-gfx-graphics-library?view=all

The touch screen uses the STMPE610 library; there's a description and original
demo version of `TouchPaintThing` here:
https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-2-4-tft-touch-screen-featherwing?view=all#resistive-touch-screen


# Reading

Following on from the work we did in the last couple of weeks (on provisioning
and over-the-air updates), have a look at these:

- _Challenges with Wi-Fi Provisioning for Embedded Systems_
  http://www.argenox.com/library/challenges-with-wi-fi-provisioning-for-embedded-systems/
- _A Crash Course In Provisioning Wireless Networks_
  https://www.link-labs.com/blog/provisioning-wireless-networks
- _ESP32 vs. other industrial IoT microcontrollers_
  http://uhurumkate.blogspot.com/2017/09/esp32-as-professional-gradeindustry-40.html


# LiPo Safety

## What are lithium polymer batteries?

Lithium Polymer (or LiPo) cells are one of the most effective commercially
available rechargeable batteries, having high energy and power density. These
batteries are used in all manner of mobile applications and are particularly
popular with remote control (RC) hobbyists.

You will be given a LiPo battery in the second half of term as part of the
ESP32 project hardware for COM3505. The battery is inside a case with the
other electronics, but is potentially dangerous if the case is damaged or
removed.

## What are the dangers?

Although these cells are very useful, they can be dangerous when mistreated or
misused. There are three main causes of cell failure: puncture, over-heating
and over-charging. If the battery fails as a result of any of these, hazardous
electrolyte leakage, fire or explosions may occur.

The rate of transfer of energy within the battery is strongly linked to its
internal heat; when over-heated the cell's long term performance will degrade,
more energy is released and the battery gets hotter, creating a dangerous
feedback loop. If this continues the electrolyte will vaporise and cause the
battery to expand, which may lead to fire or even an explosion.

This same effect can be caused by over-charging the battery, or in some cases
even just leaving it charged in the wrong circumstances. Henry (one of our
previous teaching assistants on the course) used to fly an RC helicopter that
ran off a multi-cell LiPo pack. Having forgotten to discharge it, it was left
in a container in his shed. Many months later the cell exploded in a ball of
flame nearly burning down the shed!

The sensitive chemistry of the batteries can also lead to fire if the battery
gets punctured and vents into the air.

## Avoiding problems

**ALWAYS** take the following precautions when using LiPos in COM3505:

- Only use the battery as installed in the hardware we gave you.
- Only charge the battery using the board which we gave you.
- Regularly inspect the hardware, especially if you need to open the case to
  make connections; check the battery visually for damage, heating or possible
  puncture. If you spot anything potentially problematic inform a member of
  staff immediately.
- If a battery becomes hot:
    - if it appears safe to do so, unplug it from the power source
    - warn others present to move away from the battery and do so yourself
    - inform a member of staff immediately
- If you are at all unsure of any of these instructions please inform a member
  of staff.
- See also https://goo.gl/HyrxFb
